
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Overview

The `councilcount` package allows easy access to population data for
around 70 demographic groups across various NYC geographic boundaries.
This data was pulled from the 2017-2021 5-Year American Community
Survey. For geographic boundaries that are not included in the ACS, like
council districts, estimates were generated.

## Installation

You can install the released version of `councilcount` from GitHub

``` r
remotes::install_github("newyorkcitycouncil/councilcount")
```

## Load Package

``` r
library(tidyverse)
# load last
library(councilcount)
```

## Vignette

For demos of the functions included in `councilcount`, please visit
`vignettes/councilverse.Rmd`.

## Quick Start

First load the `councilcount` package as above.

### Functions

#### R

`councilcount` includes 3 functions:

`get_bbl_estimates()` – Generates a dataframe that provides population
estimates at the point level (there are also columns for various other
geographies, like council district) `get_census_variables()` – Provides
information on all of the ACS demographic variables that can be accessed
using `get_geo_estimates()` via variable codes `get_geo_estimates()` –
Creates a dataframe that provides population estimates for selected
demographic variables along chosen geographic boundaries (e.g. council
district, borough, etc.)

Simply run `get_bbl_estimates()` and `get_census_variables()` to access
the desired dataframes. They do not require any inputs.

`get_geo_estimates()` has 3 parameters:

`geo` – The desired geographic region. Please select from the following
list: \*\* Council Distrist: “councildist” \*\* Community Distrist:
“communitydist” \*\* School District: “schooldist” \*\* Police Precinct:
“policeprct” \*\* Neighborhood Tabulation Area: “nta” \*\* Borough:
“borough” `var_codes` – The desired demographic group(s), as represented
by the ACS variable code. To access the list of available demographic
variables and their codes, please run `get_census_variables()`
`boundary_year` – If “councildist” is selected, the boundary year must
be specified as 2013 or 2023. The default is 2013.

Here is an example, in which codes for “Female” and “Adults with
Bachelor’s degree or higher” are used. The data is requested along 2023
Council District boundaries.

``` r
vars <- c('DP05_0003PE', 'DP02_0068E')
get_geo_estimates(geo = "councildist", var_codes = vars, boundary_year = "2023") 
```

#### Python

The equivalent functions are also available in Python. To access them,
use the following code:

``` python
import sys
# set absolute path to councilverse/inst/python location
sys.path.insert(0, "/{YOUR PATH}/councilverse/inst/python")
from retrieve_estimates import get_bbl_estimates, get_census_variables, get_geo_estimates
```

`get_bbl_estimates()` and `get_census_variables()` function the same in
both R and Python. However, `get_geo_estimates()` has some differences
in Python. Instead of having separate parameters for geo and boundary
year, there are two input options for Council Districts, “councildist13”
and “councildist23.” Data for New York City as a whole is also available
using “nyc” for geo. Otherwise, the geo input options are the same.
There are also two additional parameters, `polygons` and `download`,
with the defaults set at False. If `polygons` is set to True, the
dataframe will include a column with the geometries associated with each
geographic region. If `download` is set to True, the dataframe will
automatically download as a CSV when the function runs.

#### Data Sources 

* [The Five Year American Community Survey (ACS)](https://www.census.gov/data/developers/data-sets/acs-5year.html)
  * 2006-2011
  * 2012-2016
  * 2017-2021
* [Primary Land Use Tax Lot Output (PLUTO) datasets](https://www.nyc.gov/site/planning/data-maps/open-data/dwn-pluto-mappluto.page)
  * 2011
  * 2016
  * 2021  

#### Methodology 

Estimates for around 70 ACS demographic variables were generated for the dashboard. Estimates are available at Council District, Community District, School District, Police Precinct, Neighborhood Tabulation Area, Borough, and New York City levels. CouncilCount utilizes the 5-Year ACS, meaning the data points presented on the dashboard represent 5-year averages for the listed demographic variables. Using the multiyear estimates increases the statistical reliability of the data, especially for small population subgroups and regions with low populations. 

These estimates were generated using the 2007-2011, 2012-2016, and 2017-2021 ACS 5-Year Estimates Data Profiles datasets, which provide demographic estimates by census tract. Estimates for some geographies, like neighborhood tabulation areas, which are built from census tracts, may be generated by directly aggregating census-tract-level data. However, this method does not work for geographies that have no relation to census tracts, like council districts and police precincts. In order to generate estimates for such geographies, ACS demographic data was synthesized with building data from the 2011, 2016, and 2021 PLUTO datasets to approximate the distribution of subpopulations around the city for each time period. For more information on the method used to generate the demographic estimates presented on CouncilCount, please contact DataOperationsUnit@council.nyc.gov.

